---
layout: page
title: Liouville's Theorem
---

# Liouville's Theorem

Consider a \\(2n\\)-dimensional *symplectic manifold* \\((M, \omega)\\). Observe \\(\omega\\) induces a natural volume form
\\[
    \omega^n = \omega \wedge \cdots \wedge \omega,
\\]
which will be non-degenerate by the following lemma.

**Lemma.** If \\(\omega\\) is symplectic, then \\(\omega^n \neq 0\\) at ant point.

*Proof.* At each point \\(p \in N\\), take a *symplectic basis* \\((A\_1, B\_1, \cdots, A\_n, B\_n)\\) of \\(T\_pM\\) and dual basis \\((\alpha^1, \beta^1, \cdots \alpha^n, \beta^n)\\) of \\(T\_p^*M\\). Recall that under this basis we have
\\[
    \omega\_p = \sum\_{i=1}^n \alpha^i \wedge \beta^i
\\]
and so we can compute
\\[
    \omega\_p^n 
    = \left(\sum\_{i=1}^n \alpha^i \wedge \beta^i\right)^n
    = n!\ \alpha^1 \wedge \beta^1 \wedge \cdots \wedge \alpha^n \wedge \beta^n \neq 0
    \label{eq:nonzero}
    \tag{\\(\star\\)}
\\]
by canceling terms with repeated \\(1\\)-forms and using that \\(2\\)-forms commute under the wedge product.
<div style="text-align: right"> \(\square\) </div>

Motivated by the appearance of \\(n!\\) in \eqref{eq:nonzero}, we define the ***Liouville volume form*** to be \\(\frac{1}{n!}\omega^n\\) so that it has a nice expression in a symplectic basis. In particular, note *Darboux coordinates* \\((x^1, \cdots, x^m, \xi^1, \cdots, x^n)\\) over a symplectic manifold are designed so that \\((dx^1, d\xi^1, \cdots, dx^n, d\xi^n)\\) is a symplectic basis over each point and therefore by the same computation as in \eqref{eq:nonzero}, the Liouville volume form in Darboux coordinates is simply
\\[
    \frac{1}{n!}\omega\_p^n 
    = dx^1 \wedge d\xi^1 \wedge \cdots \wedge dx^n \wedge d\xi^n.
\\]
Recall a *Hamiltonian system* is the pairing of a symplectic manifold \\((M, \omega)\\) with a *Hamiltonian* \\(H: T^\*M \to \mathbb{R}\\). This induces a *Hamiltonian flow* generated by by the vector field \\(X\_H\\) over \\(T^\*M\\) characterized by
\\[
    i\_{X\_H}\omega = dH.
    \label{eq:hamilton}
    \tag{H}
\\]
The main utility of the Liouville volume form is that it will be invariant under the Hamiltonian flow, which is the content of Liouville's theorem.

**Theorem (Liouville's Theorem).** If \\((M, \omega, H)\\) is a Hamiltonian system, then \\(\mathcal{L}_{X\_H} \omega = 0\\).

*Proof.* First recall \\(\omega\\) is invariant under the Hamiltonian flow by
\\[
    \mathcal{L}\_{X\_H}\omega = i\_{X\_H} d\omega + di\_{X\_H}\omega = 0 + d^2 H = 0
\\]
where we used \eqref{eq:hamilton} and that \\(\omega\\) is closed. Thus, using the Leibniz rule for the Lie derivative and the above we can compute
\\[
    \mathcal{L}\_{X\_H}\left(\frac{1}{n!}\omega^n\right)
    = \frac{1}{n!} \sum\_{i=1}^n \omega \wedge \cdots \wedge \omega \wedge \mathcal{L}\_{X\_H}\omega \wedge \omega \wedge \cdots \wedge \omega = 0
\\]
where the \\(\mathcal{L}\_{X\_H}\omega\\) term is the \\(i\\)th term in the wedge product for each \\(i\\) in the sum.
<div style="text-align: right"> \(\square\) </div>